Tree Ring Data Description
Description of Tree Ring Data Files and Procedures


Site Selection and Sample Collection
Tree ring samples are collected in the field by using a hand held increment borer to remove 
a cylinder of wood roughly 5mm in diameter along the radius of a tree. The investigator selects 
the site in order to maximize a particular signal. For example, a steep, rocky, south facing 
slope may be selected to find trees under maximum water stress, such that growth rates can 
become a strong proxy for precipitation. Therefore, it is essential to be familiar with the 
characteristics of the site, as well as the factors regulating tree growth, in order to 
correctly interpret the results. For reliable statistical analysis, a rule of thumb is 
20 trees per site, but this will vary according to the strength of the climate signal 
in the trees and the purpose of the collection. Two samples are generally collected 
per tree to facilitate cross-correlation and accurate dating of the annual rings.

The samples are returned to the laboratory, where they are mounted and finely sanded 
to allow cross-dating and measurement of the widths of the annual rings. (In some cases 
wood density is also measured, which may provide a more reliable growth signal and 
additional information). The ring widths are measured to the nearest 0.01mm or .001mm 
and recorded in computerized data files.

A statistical evaluation of the crossdating has been conducted for most ITRDB sites 
using the COFECHA program contained in the ITRDB Program Library.

Note: In the Southern Hemisphere, all collections are dated such that the calendar year 
represents the year in which tree growth began.



Standardization
The raw ring width data from the samples collected at one site are standardized 
and the results are averaged into a site chronology. The standardization process 
involves fitting a curve to the ring-width series, and then dividing each ring-width 
value by the corresponding curve value (or calculating the difference between the 
ring-width values and the curve value) to generate a series of growth indices. 
This process allows samples with large differences in growth rates to be combined, 
and can be used to remove any undesired growth trends present. For example, a typical 
sample might display exponentially declining growth with age, the classic biological 
growth curve. Standardizing this sample using a negative exponential function results 
in data values which represent the departure from the "expected" value for a given year. 
The series of standardized growth indices is then used to interpret a proxy environmental 
signal in the data.

Many of the chronologies in the ITRDB were created with Program ARSTAN, developed by 
Dr. Edward R. Cook at the Tree-Ring Laboratory, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory 
of Columbia University, Palisades, New York (Cook 1985). Program ARSTAN produces 
chronologies from tree-ring measurement series by detrending and indexing (standardizing) 
the series, then applying a robust estimation of the mean value function to remove effects 
of endogenous stand disturbances. Three versions of the chronology are produced, 
intended to contain a maximum common signal and a minimum amount of noise. 
The standard chronology, designated sitecode.crn, is processed as above without 
autoregressive modeling. The residual ("whitened") chronology, designated sitecodeR.crn, 
is additionally processed using autoregressive modeling to remove autocorrelation. 
The third version, or ARSTAN chronology, designated sitecodeA.crn, is calculated by 
reincorporating the pooled autoregression (persistence) into the residual chronology.

The index values are unitless, with a nearly stable mean and variance, allowing indices 
from numerous trees to be averaged into a site chronology. The statistical methods 
for accomplishing the standardization can be complex. For a more complete discussion 
of methods, see References below. 

The chronology represents the departure of growth for a given year vs. the series mean, 
and is expressed as a 3 or 4 digit integer with 1.000 (listed without the decimal point 
as 1000 or 100 in the data files) representing the long term mean. Higher or lower values 
for a given year represent proportionally higher or lower tree growth for that year. 
A researcher can combine knowledge of the individual site and tree species to interpret 
the growth variations in terms of climate or other environmental factors.

The chronologies recorded here are those calculated by the original investigator. 
The raw ring widths are also archived to allow reprocessing of the chronologies.



Format for Tree-Ring Data Files

Raw Data Files (File Extension .RWL)

These are measurements in units of .01mm or .001mm of the thickness of tree ring width 
for each year. Each file consists of all the measurements for a given site. Fifty or more 
Core ID numbers and data series may comprise one (site) file. Missing value code is 
999 or -9999. The 10 values following the decade are the 10 annual measurements 
for the 10 years of that decade. First and last decade rows for each core may contain 
less than 10 values. The standard format is:

Core ID Number columns 1-6
Decade columns 9-12
Data Values columns 13-73, 6 columns/measurement, 10(I6)
Optional Site ID columns 74-78



Processed Data Files (Site Chronologies, File Extension .CRN)

These are the standardized tree-growth indices from a stand of trees, representing the mean 
growth observed for each year over the entire stand. Site chronologies are used in 
climate analysis. Data are stored as 3 or 4-digit numbers, with a value of 1000 
representing mean growth, a minimum value of 0 (no growth), and no defined maximum. 
There is only one time series per file, in contrast to the raw data files. 
Missing value code is 9990. Site information is stored in the first 3 records of the file.

Format for chronology header records:

Record #1: 1-6 Site ID, 10-61 Site Name, 62-65 Species Code, optional ID#'s
Record #2: 1-6 Site ID, 10-22 State/Country, 23-30 Species, 41-45 Elevation, 48-57 Lat-Long, 68-76 1st & last Year
Note: lat-lons are in degrees and minutes, ddmm or dddmm
Record #3: 1-6 Site ID, 10-72 Lead Investigator, 73-80 comp. date

Chronology Data, Records 4-??

Site ID# column 1-6
Decade column 7-10
Index Value-Sample Number* pairs of values, columns 11-80, 10(I4+I3)
TRL ID#(optional) column 82-88

*Index Values, columns 11-14,18-21,25-28,32-35,etc
# of samples used in calculating chronology, columns 15-17,22-24,29-31,36-38,etc.
Example:1450 670 171018 17 897 18...
Here, 670 is the ring-width index value for the year 1450, with a sample size of 17;
1018 is the ring-width index value for the year 1451, with a sample size of 17;
897 is the ring-width index value for the year 1452, with a sample size of 18


Chronology Statistics, Last Record, Optional:
Site ID# column 1-6
Number of Years column 8-10
First Order Autocorrelation column 13-16
Standard Deviation column 19-22
Mean Sensitivity column 25-28
Mean Index Value column 29-35
Sum of Indices column 37-44
Sum of Squares of Indices column 46-53
Max# of series column 62-63


ITRDB Species Codes

The complete list of species codes was compiled by Henri D. Grissino-Mayer, 
and is available via his Ultimate Tree-Ring Web Pages.


Key to Data Type Codes

The majority of ring measurements in the ITRDB are of the width of the annual ring. 
However, some of the series are measurements of portions of the annual ring, namely 
Earlywood or Springwood, and Latewood. The Earlywood appears light in color due to 
less dense cell walls, and is formed in the earlier part of the growing season. 
The Latewood, darker due to more dense cell walls, is formed later in the growing season. 
Some researchers measure wood density in addition to width, and density measurements 
can also made on the Earlywood and Latewood portions of the annual ring, 
as well as the as maximum and minimum density over the entire ring. 
Below is a table of the codes used to designate the type of measurement contained 
within a data file. The filename convention is a site code, optionally followed by 
a measurement and/or a chronology type. Default values are ringwidth measurement type 
and standard chronology (as described above), and these types are not coded into the filenames. 
For example, the ringwidth measurement file and standard chronology file for site CO512 
are co512.rwl and co512.crn. The earlywood measurements file is co512e.rwl, and the latewood 
arstan chronology file is co512la.crn. A table of the codes used:

Tree Ring Measurement Type Codes
Code   Measurement Type
D     Total Ring Density
E     Earlywood Width
I     Earlywood Density
L     Latewood Width
N     Minimum Density
R     Ring Width
T     Latewood Density
X     Maximum Density
P     Latewood Percent
Tree Ring Chronology Type Codes
Code   Chronology Type
A     ARSTND
P     Low Pass Filter
R     Residual
S     Standard
W     Re-Whitened Residual
N     Measurements Only


References
Cook, E.R., and Kairiukstis, L.A., eds. 1990. 
Methods of Dendrochronology. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 101 Philip Drive, Norwell, MA 02061 USA, 
or P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

Cook, E.R. 1985. 
A Time Series Approach to Tree-Ring Standardization. 
PhD Dissertation. University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

Esper, J., Cook, E.R., Krusic, P.J., Peters, K., Schweingruber, F.H. 2003. 
Tests of the RCS method for preserving low-frequency variability in long tree-ring chronologies. 
Tree-Ring Research 59(2): 81-98.

Fritts, H. C. 1976. Tree Rings and Climate. 
Academic Press LTD., 24/28 Oval Road, London NW1, 
or 111 Fifth Avenue, New York NY 10003.

Hughes, M.K. et al. 1982. 
Climate from Tree Rings. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 